Master the Fundamentals of AI and Machine Learning - Learning Path

Oliver Yarbrough
Oliver Yarbrough, PMP, is an author, speaker, trainer, and project management and strategic marketing expert.After a highly productive corporate career that took him from the halls of corporate America to assignments in the Middle East and beyond, Oliver combined his diverse B2B marketing, sales, and project management experience in order to empower organizations and professionals to build relationships faster, shorten sales cycles, execute projects better, and increase profits.He offers fresh insights and encourages his audiences and clients to take action with a captivating, entertaining, and down-to-earth style. He shares with them his hands-on experience building and managing professional relationships for some of the largest companies in the world, including Lucent Technologies, Staples, and Sprint, along with his own successful business ventures.Oliver holds a master's degree from the F. W. Olin Graduate School of Business at Babson College (MBA program ranked #1 in entrepreneurship for 25 consecutive years by U.S. News & World Report). He is a former board member of the Technology Association of Georgia (TAG), as well as the National Contract Management Association (NCMA), Atlanta chapter. Additionally, he has been featured in "People on the Move" in the Atlanta Business Chronicle.Today, he is an active member of the Project Management Institute (PMI). Oliver is also president of BOBCAT Academy. He can be found at  OliverYarbrough.com and on Twitter @OliverYarbrough.On a personal note, Oliver has a great passion for global cultural immersion. He loves to travel and learn about customs from locals that he meets. He has been fortunate to live, work, and explore such fascinating places as South Africa, Asia, South America, Central America, Saudi Arabia, and Canada. Currently, he lives and works in Atlanta, Georgia, where he is a staple in the city's professional and social fabric, volunteering with nonprofit organizations, moderating events, and regularly networking.

