How to add music to your Instagram story

Want to learn how to add music to an Instagram story? And
make your story more fun and engaging to attract more views and thus,
followers. Then, you have come to the right place. 
There are two ways to go about it, and one is by using the music sticker Instagram released in June, 2018. The other option is to use third party tools, like Lumen5 to create your videos with music before you share it in your story. 
This new music feature is trending worldwide with Instagrammers dying to use it. No wonder since 60 percent of Instagram stories are played with the sound on. But unfortunately the music sticker is available in a few countries for now. 
So the best thing to do if you are in a country where the music sticker is still unavailable is to use the second option of adding music to your video by yourself. Something we will elaborate on later in the article.
Now before we get into the details of how to add music to an
Instagram story, here is a quick outline of what you will learn:
How to add music to an Instagram story with the music stickerHow to first select the song before creating the story Quick tips to easy the process of adding soundtracksHow to add music to an Instagram story using third party apps
Also, if you happen to need some help creating the perfect Instagram story, you can always use the Instagram story creator by Lumen5. This software will help you create the perfect video for your story with the help of artificial intelligence in an easy way.
How to Add Music to
an Instagram Story With The Music Sticker
Though the music sticker feature is available on both iOS and Android phones, you need to first update your Instagram App to the latest version to get it if you dont already have it. 
If this doesnt work, stop the App for a short while and
afterwards, re-start it. If it also doesnt work, then you should try
uninstalling and re-installing it. If all this fails, then youre better off
adding your own music to the story or waiting for the music sticker feature to
roll out to you.
Upon getting the music feature on your phone, you will have
a couple of options to choose from as you opt to add music to your story. You
can either decide to create the video first and then, go ahead to add music to
it. Or select the song first and after, record the video to go along with it. 
We will show you how to use both options, but first lets
see how you can add music to an Instagram story after recording the video. For
starters, heres a quick overview of the steps before we move on to the more
detailed description: 
Create a video or image postClick on the sticker icon at the upper right corner of your phoneTap the music iconFind a suitable songSelect the part of the song that you likeAdd that part to the Instagram storyShare the story
Now lets dive into the details. Launch your Instagram app and swipe left to get to your camera. Then, click the sticker icon that looks like a botched face smiley at the top-right corner on your screen. It will take you to another screen where youll find the music sticker under the mention sticker. 

Tap on the music sticker to access the music-rich Instagram library that boasts of thousands of licensed songs. Then, go ahead and search for the song that best suits your story according to mood, genre and popularity. 

To determine whether its the right track for your story,
just click on the song to preview it. But if you already have a particular tune
in mind, you can go ahead and browse for it by song, artist or album in the
search bar at the top of your screen. 
Next, play the song to select the exact part you want to add to your Instagram story. You can find that particular part by forwarding or rewinding the track on the time bar. 
Make sure the soundtrack for your static image post is 15
seconds long or less because that is the maximum time allowed for them. Though
when it comes to videos, the song length is by set by default to match the
length of your video.
Then, hit Done
to add the song to your story. After, preview the story to check if the music
sticker appears on your story with the song title and artists name, and also,
to see if its in a fitting position. Further, go on to check if the song
complements your story. If not, make the necessary changes. 
Like you can hold and drag the sticker to a desired location
and also resize it to suit your needs. Or even select a new song if the current
one isnt working for you. Moreover, if you cant see the music sticker on the
story, it means you didnt actually add the track and thus, need to redo the
process.
Once youve finished, tap the + icon with the words Your Story under it to share your
Instagram story with your followers and other Instagrammers.
Now let us move on, and show you how to use the other option
of adding music to an Instagram story using the music sticker. 
How to First Select
the Song before Creating the Story 
If you wish to select the song first before you create the story, click the camera icon at the upper right on your app or the Your Story below it to open a new screen. Then, click on the Music option at the bottom of your screen to get to the music library.
From there, follow the same steps you used while selecting
the song after first recording the video. 
Pick a suitable song, choose the section you want for your
story and then, go ahead to record the video while the music plays along in the
background.
Quick Tips
Always remember to preview your Instagram story before you
upload it to avoid sharing an embarrassing video. By previewing, you will be
able to find all the mistakes and correct them for a thrilling watch.
How to Add Music to
an Instagram Story Using Third Party Tools
If you prefer adding your own personal music to a story or you dont have the music sticker feature on your phone, you can still add soundtracks to your videos with third party tools, like our video creation tool  Lumen5. And after, upload the video on Instagram for sharing in your story. 
The great thing about Lumen5 is that its not only cheap and
easy to use, but also offers a wide selection of licensed music for you to
choose from. And if you prefer to add your own music, that option is also
available. Whats more, it allows you to customize your video by adding a
company logo, a font and colors that match your brand. 
To get started, check out the on-demand webinar here to learn how to use the Lumen5 tool.
But if you fancy reading to watching a video, then read on
to see the steps you can follow when adding music to a video using Lumen5:
First, create a free account here and after, open the Lumen5 dashboard to select a suitable Instagram story templateThen, tap the Style Tab to choose an appropriate theme, and a font from the dropdown menu under the style tab.      When  youre done, click the Create Video button to open a new screen where youll have to choose how you want to create your video. Move down to select Upload Media to start making the video.Now go on to choose the right dimensions for the video to suit the Instagram standards. Instagram stories work best with an aspect ratio of 9:16 vertical format and a video resolution of 1080x1920px.Next,  open the music dashboard to select the track you want to add to the video from the thousands of songs in the library, or upload your own music to add it to your video. With that done, publish the video and then, preview it in your dashboard to catch and fix all the mistakes.Download the video to your phone, and after upload it to your Instagram story. Go on to add the Sound On icon to the story from the sticker feature to show viewers that your story has a soundtrack before sharing it as usual.
Quick Tips
When uploading a song, always ensure it isnt copyrighted before you upload it. Otherwise you risk having it flagged when you share your story on Instagram.Also, the song needs to be MP3 and 100MB. If the song isnt MP3, convert it using an online conversion  tool of your choice.
With that, you now know how to spice up your Instagram stories by adding background music to them and this will help you attract more attention and gain more followers. Just remember to always make sure the songs you add are of great taste, whether they are the latest hits or 90s throwbacks. Once youve picked the perfect song, its easy to use theLumen5 tool to add it to your Instagram story.  
Alex helps businesses create content that converts users into customers. She flips over wording challenges while keeping her zen. When shes away from her desk, youll probably find her doing yoga, surfing, reading, camping, or walking her dog on the beach.
Be a video marketing thought leader. Share with your network.Gerald Ainomugisha is a freelance writer with a pen that is keen for business and entrepreneurship, with a particular focus on IT, HR and marketing.
 
