Opinion: Artificial Intelligence and How It Will Change Music Production - Deep House Amsterdam

In the future we will be listening to music produced by Artificial Intelligence (AI), like it or not. However harsh and uninspiring this statement might sound, dont jump into conclusions just yet. Yesterday, 24th Nov, BPI held a conference Musics smart future, where themain theme analysed to the bone was AI and its impact to the music industry. Therefore, as this topic is something we wanted totouch down since long ago, it presented us withthe perfect occasion.
2015 and 2016 has seen the rise of the use of AI in music making, research and general investment, claimed BPI in their report on the issue. The scope of AI doesnt just touchdown on the self driving cars. Its use is set out to revolutionise the way we create, discover, listen and work with music. Soeven if the waiting list for your first Tesla is too long, you may feel AI knocking its way into your life withthe after-weekend office discussions on the satisfaction on the automated weekly playlistonSpotify becoming a familiar routine around you.
Will Artificial Intelligence be the next Superstar?
Its probably fair to say that Artificial Intelligence (AI) will change the music industry and lots of other industries a lot more than the internet did.. As Music Ally cites, it was astatement, comparing the impact of the artificial intelligence to the disruption that took over the music industry as Napster was launched in the late 1990s was posed by Ed Newton-Rex in yesterdays conference. His company Jukedeck has utilised the AI technology to compose music and so far raised $2.6m of funding.
The initial customers of Jukedeck have been YouTube channels and creators, who want to quickly create music to use in their videos. Based on the preference the mood, style, tempo and length of the music can be chosen and then created by the AI system to match. Its royalty-free and cheap. Its a cost-play, AI, he said. In the early stages at least..
Furthermore, Newton-Rex added that AI will be able to make music even more personalised than Spotify is able to personalise it to individuals right now with Discover Weekly and Daily Mix playlists.AI is going to let su really personalise, not just track by track, but note by note, to the power that a film score has. This is how personalised music is going to be when essentially the thing in your pocket is writing it for you, he said.
Another productbased onIBMs AI technology, calledWatson Beat, based on information output derived from emotion, which the product lead Cate Cowburn describes asan extensive knowledge of music history as well as all the characteristics of music keys. Given20 seconds of certain tuneit can deconstruct that and reconstruct a new melody based on the instructions of the apps (human) user.
Artificial Intelligence vs. theArtist vs. theAudience?
So Are all composers totally screwed? Is it going to take peoples jobs?  is a valid question to address. Thus, when it comes to the existential threat that AI poses on the artistry, Ed, himself not a coder but a composer, suggested that art is about more than just the work itself. In other words, these days creatingmusic that sounds good is not enough, people needa the personality, anartistic idea they can fall for. Even if just to refer to our own fascination to the legends like Freddie Mercure, Bowie or Leonard Cohen.
In other words, these days creating music that sounds good is not enough, people need a the personality, an artistic idea they can fall for.
In a discussion addressed afterwards James Healy, VP of global digital business at Universal Music, agreed with the appeal of human artists being more than their music. If youre writing library music, corporate background music, this [AI] is going to start eating your lunch sooner rather than later. He adds  People want to buy into an artist, to buy into the artists back-story, what theyre about, he said.
Previously we have pointed to technology that democratises (easier access) music production, and is speculated to have conflictive outcomes towards creativity. Ed touchpoints the discussion by saying that making music has in fact become the act of the elite: [] What weve seen on our site is weve seen a bunch of people who dont have the skill to write a backing track for themselves. Theyve made a backing track then written a tune over the top and turned it into a music video, he said. AI is going to let a lot more people make music, which i think is really exciting.
Furthermore, the CEO of Jukedecksuggests that the winner in the end is the audience, as he claims that: Theres just going to be more art, more music in the world when computers can be creative, and this is a good thing in my book as long as its decent music,.
Computers writing music with feeling?
Justthinking of listening to computer generated music,mightincite the gag in your throat of its synthetic unnatural way humanity is taking. Thus what can be predicted, when itcomes to questioning the appeal of the computer generated music to humans?
Lets go fullgeek here. BPIs CEO, Geoff Taylor referenced Google futurist Raymond Kurzweils prediction, that around 2045 of the technological singularity, which means thatAI will reach apeak of its intelligence and self-awareness. Taylor asked the same frightening questionSpike Joness Her, where the main character falls in love with AI machine, was asking: will AI becapable to appealto human feelings? Particularly, in the art of music:[..] whenmachines start to think independently, will the music that they create engage human emotions in the same way that human creativity does?.
As Werner Herzog observes in his latest documentary, Lo and Behold, Reveries of the Connected Worldthe ethics of today willnot be the same as the ethics of tomorrow. James Basset,thehead of digital creative at Sony Music UK, pinpoints:AI emotion may not be the same as human emotion. where he continues on the general predictability [] No less a person than Elon Musk reckons AI is the biggest issue facing humankind in the foreseeable future. And thats a guy with colonising Mars on his to-do list!.
If you will allow me, I will compare the takeover of the music production by AI to the invention of photography, when tohave a picture ofa beautiful sight one did not have to be aRembrandt anymore, emotional outcome wise, the existance of Google streets or google Earth did not make visiting Cuba or Egypt pyramids less special. 
One thing is certain, the speculations are and can be only about the near future, as it is obvious, that the scope and the speed of the AI development is unimaginable. Best we can do to develop our subjective take on the topic is listen to the music created by AI and compare to the man-made creations.

