This Online Computer Program Composes Music Faster Than You Can : Ask.Audio
If you read AskAudio on a regular basis youll know that AI (artificial intelligence) has been making serious waves for all aspects of music production, from composing to arranging to mastering. Much of this tech happens in our music making software and has been happening for a while.
Of late, services like LANDR amongst others have shown us that, albeit with certain limitations, computer algorithms are being used online to analyse and automatically process audio. In LANDRs case, to master the audio.
JukeDeck provides algorithms for music makers too. Well, also for non-music makers. So, if your day job is composing for corporate video, promos, etc, then look away now.
Five years ago Ed Rex, a Cambridge music degree graduate, stumbled into a Harvard lecture on computer science and was inspired to teach a computer to write music. Now before you click away, Jukedecks compositions have been used by Google, Natural History Museum and other companies for ads and jingles. Not too shoddy!
According to The Telegraph, Jukedecks AI composer writes its music note by note rather than using loops. I simply had to try it out to see how good this is.
The interface is minimal and therefore accessible to non-musicians. Theres not a huge number of options to choose from, but heres what you can do:
First you create a track and choose the Genre: Piano, Folk, Rock, Electronic, Ambient, Cinematic or Pop. There are a number of Moods to choose from which update depending on the genre you chose. And you can choose a duration for the composition.


Once you've created a track in Jukedeck this is what you'll see.



If you want, you can hit Create Track now, or you can browse the Instruments tab and the Tempo tab to get a little more specific.
Then 30 seconds later. Literally 30 seconds, which oddly feels like a long time to wait for anything on the internet, and your track is ready to play. They even name it for you!
Judge for yourself I asked for a meditative ambient track:
Listen to my first ambient composition by Jukedeck: https://www.jukedeck.com/share/15cd0a23b914ec575fec29a9b8c4e671ef36bfeee93342c4f2845ce21f51d70f
The interface is lovely and easy to navigate, but its a shame theres currently no option to embed the track on another website, though you can share to Twitter and Facebook.
You can download up to 5 tracks a month for free or pay $6.99 thereafter, and the track is royalty free if youre using this as a business with fewer than 10 employees. Larger businesses can pay $21.99 per download, or you can buy own the track for $199.
It will be interesting to see whether Jukedeck has an impact on human composers, or if theyll make the composition tech accessible to human composers and music makers in the future.
Or perhaps youre of the inclination to see this as the final nail in the coffin for humans being able to make money from music composition? Should human composers and musicians hang up their boots already? Of course not. Whilethe tech continues to push forwardsomehow humans need to find new ways to adapt and provide something different and unique musically.
[Via: The Telegraph]
Web: https://www.jukedeck.com/

