Can AI make beautiful music? - Quora
The revolution era of technology has brought surprises to the music industry. Now, Artificial Intelligence has a virtuoso impact on composing music as well.We can find machines that can write songs, software that produces background scores music for film and general videos. In many ways, we already know that artificial intelligence (AI)is having a big effect on our relationship with music.Companies like Spotify & Amazon constantly adapting this form of technology that works quite accurately suggesting songs, albums or artists that we should like based on our previous listening experience.Artificial Intelligence is a creative director, music producer & a marketer, how? follow the below points:1) Model: AI model created, having the capability to compose altogether different, innovative, and unique musical pieces. By training the AI model with a considerable amount and type of dataset containing random lyrics and music compositions, we can obtain AI that independently generates lyrics.2) Listening: If you need music for working or commuting, or really anything aside from full-on listening, it could probably be created by a program in the next few years.3) Inexpensive: AI helps artists record music inexpensively. We have AI apps that record music, assisting independent artists in recording their music.4) Marketing: AI can help marketers to obtain critical information on how to effectively sell a music album to the listeners. By analyzing the behavioral pattern of listeners, AI can gauge the sentiments of users and recommend them songs based on their interests.5) Original: AI create original musical pieces but also play the music, cool! In the future, we might see robots performing on stage along with musicians and artists.AI will innovate the industry to an extent it is doing now. Similarly, we do not know what technological disruption AI will bring 5 years from now. As far as AI does not cause any harm to the jobs of artists and musicians, lets wait for AI to take charge.Get more feeds on Artificial Intelligence on Botgento - Most Powerful Facebook Messenger Chatbot for Magento