Scripthica: Learn how to create computer-generated music. by Gabriel Sanchez - Kickstarter
I'm building a computer-assisted music composition web environment so that anyone can create and share algorithmic computer music. I'll be providing free tutorials so that anyone can learn how to use this software, but I'm also writing an e-book and giving other rewards for people that want to learn more about different tools and techniques for algorithmic music composition. Your support will help me to further improve this software. Before you ask, yes, it's going to be Open Source / Free Software.Algorithmic composition is the science and art of creating and using algorithms to compose music. Computer-aided music composition systems allow composers to formalise their musical intentions and create programs that output music or other compositional materials. Computers have been used for music composition since the late 1950's, however, a variety of algorithmic techniques and musical machines can be traced centuries back.Scripthica is a web environment for creating, listening and sharing 
algorithmic computer music. It provides a code editor, a terminal 
emulator and computer-assisted music composition toolkits based on the 
Scheme and JavaScript programming languages that can output sheet music 
and MIDI files. Scripthica provides a collection of 
algorithms and tools useful for algorithmic computer music composition. Scripthica allows computer musicians to share musical scripts so that others can modify the source code and listen to unique music. 


Who is this project for?
This project is for artists, musicians, programmers or anyone interested in learning about algorithmic composition. A background in computer programming is not necessary. If you are completely new to computer programming, you should consider the $35 ($25 for early backers) pledge to get the programming tutorials and screencasts.
JavaScript & Scheme
JavaScript is a prototype-based scripting language that supports object-oriented, functional and imperative programming styles. It is known for its wide use in web development but it's also used as a scripting language for computer-assisted music composition software, game development and even databases.
Scheme is a functional programming language created at the MIT Artificial Intelligence Lab by Guy Steele and Gerald Sussman. It is one of the main dialects of LISP and it's commonly used as a scripting language for a variety of applications ranging from computer-aided music composition to image processing. 
Why I need your support
I've been self-funding this project for the last months but I can't continue developing it because I don't have much money left. As much as I love developing this software, I can't do it on my own anymore. If the project is successfully funded, I'll use the money to 1) hire a professional editor for the e-book; 2) pay for hosting fees; 3) add new features and improve Scripthica. 
Rewards
New Software Features
New software features will be available to everyone as I intend to keep this software free for everyone to use. The more money is gathered the more time will be spent on improving this software. 
Tutorials
Basic Scripthica Tutorials: These tutorials will explain basic concepts on how to use Scripthica to create algorithmic music. Available to everyone, however, backers will get them months before they're released publicly.
JavaScript & Scheme Tutorials: Learn how to program with the JavaScript and Scheme programming languages. These tutorials will be very helpful for people with little or no programming experience. Available only to backers.

Documentation
The software documentation will be available to everyone, however, backers will get the documentation before it's released publicly.
E-book
You will get a DRM-free copy of the e-book. The e-book will cover a variety of topics related to algorithmic music composition. I will also provide the source code of the examples in the e-book.
Video tutorials
A series of screencasts where I will be explaining concepts from the tutorials, e-book and other tools and techniques for algorithmic composition.
Chat Session & Feedback
I will personally give feedback and assist you with your project.
Algorithmic Visual Art
You will get a signed one-of-a-kind piece of algorithmic visual art printed using the piezography technique. Here are some samples of my work:
Thank you for your support! Like Scripthica on Facebook and/or follow Scripthica on Twitter.

