Artificial Intelligence makes music |

Most pop music is pretty much produced using computers. Is Algorithm Idol poised to take its place in the pop music mill? Pop music automation is a field of study among musicians and computer scientists with a goal of producing successful pop music algorithmically. It is often based on the premise that pop music is especially formulaic, unchanging, and easy to compose.The idea of automating pop music composition is related to many ideas in algorithmic music, Artificial Intelligence (AI) and computational creativity.
Now we have entered to the point that a Popular YouTube Artist Uses AI To Record New Album. Taryn Southerns new single Break Free was composed by artificial intelligence. Actually the whole album I AM AI is claimed to be the first LP to be entirely composed and produced with AI.Southern used an open source AI platform called Amper Music to create the stems of Break Free. Actually AI is used also to make the following official music video for the Break Free.   
Break Free  Taryn Southern (Official Music Video) 
VIDEO
The music track and video art were created using artificial intelligence, lyrics and vocal melodies written by by Taryn. Musician Taryn Southern on composing her new album entirely with AI article tells how artificial intelligence simplifies music production for solo artists and how it was used in the production.Southern used an open source AI platform called Amper Music to create the stems of Break Free. For each track, she plugs in genre, the instruments she wants to use, and beats per minute. In return, Amper churns out disjointed verses that can be rearranged into a song, and layered beneath Southerns vocals. Toryn claims that you dont need any knowledge of instrumentation to make a great song  you just need to have a good ear.
Amper Music Techstars Music LA Presentation 2017 Drew Silverstein
VIDEO
Is this time for lots of new interesting or dull music?

More videos on AI music:
Flow Machines: can machines help us to be more creative?
Tutorial: Collaborating with an AI Music Producer
Google A.I. just created music (CNET Update)
Daddys Car: a song composed by Artificial Intelligence  in the style of the Beatles
Computer-Generated Jazz Improvisation
DeepBach: harmonization in the style of Bach generated using deep learning
Mr Shadow: a song composed by Artificial Intelligence
Links to more information:
OK computer: When pop music meets machine learning
From Jingles to Pop Hits, A.I. Is Music to Some Ears
Musician Taryn Southern on composing her new album entirely with AI


