What Skills Do I Need to Get a Job in Artificial Intelligence?
Automation, robotics and the use of sophisticated computer software and programs characterize a career in artificial intelligence (AI). Candidates interested in pursuing jobs in this field require specific education based on foundations of math, technology, logic, and engineering perspectives. Written and verbal communication skills are also important to convey how AI tools and services are effectively employed within industry settings. To acquire these skills, those with an interest in an AI career should investigate the various career choices available within the field.Skills and Abilities Helpful to Careers in AIThe most successful AI professionals often share common characteristics that enable them to succeed and advance in their careers. Working with artificial intelligence requires an analytical thought process and the ability to solve problems with cost-effective, efficient solutions. It also requires foresight about technological innovations that translate to state-of-the-art programs that allow businesses to remain competitive. Additionally, AI specialists need technical skills to design, maintain and repair technology and software programs. Finally, AI professionals must learn how to translate highly technical information in ways that others can understand in order to carry out their jobs. This requires good communication and the ability to work with colleagues on a team.Educational Requirements for Careers in Artificial IntelligenceBasic computer technology and math backgrounds form the backbone of most artificial intelligence programs. Entry level positions require at least a bachelors degree while positions entailing supervision, leadership or administrative roles frequently require masters or doctoral degrees. Typical coursework involves study of:Various level of math, including probability, statistics, algebra, calculus, logic and algorithms.Bayesian networking or graphical modeling, including neural nets.Physics, engineering and robotics.Computer science, programming languages and coding.Cognitive science theory.Candidates can find degree programs that offer specific majors in AI or pursue an AI specialization from within majors such as computer science, health informatics, graphic design, information technology or engineering.Types of AI CareersA career in artificial intelligence can be realized within a variety of settings including private companies, public organizations, education, the arts, healthcare facilities, government agencies and the military. Some positions may require security clearance prior to hiring depending on the sensitivity of information employees may be expected to handle. Examples of specific jobs held by AI professionals include:Software analysts and developers.Computer scientists and computer engineers.Algorithm specialists.Research scientists and engineering consultants.Mechanical engineers and maintenance technicians.Manufacturing and electrical engineers.Surgical technicians working with robotic tools.Medical health professionals working with artificial limbs, prosthetics, hearing aids and vision restoration devices.Military and aviation electricians working with flight simulators, drones and armaments.Graphic art designers, digital musicians, entertainment producers, textile manufacturers and architects.Post-secondary professors at technical and trade schools, vocational centers and universities.From its inception in the 1950s through the present day, artificial intelligence continues to advance and improve the quality of life across multiple industry settings. As a result, those with the skills to translate digital bits of information into meaningful human experiences will find a career in artificial intelligence to be sustaining and rewarding.