8 Best Tensorflow Courses & Certification [2019] [UPDATED]
20+ Experts have compiled this list of Best Tensorflow Course, Tutorial, Training, Class, and Certification available online for 2019. It includes both paid and free resources to help you learn Tensorflow. These courses are suitable for beginners, intermediate learners as well as experts.8 Best Tensorflow Courses, Certification & Training [2019 UPDATED]If you are a software developer or have some prior experience with coding and are looking forward to building on those skills then this certification is worth a look. These classes show you the techniques to implement the foundational principles of machine learning and deep learning using TensorFlow and build scalable models to solve real-world problems. By the end of this program, you will have the practical skills to come up with scalable solutions for these problems as well as apply for relevant job profiles.Key USPs- This lesson can be taken by anyone who has prior experience in Python. The instructor helps you to work with the fundamental features with the help of examples. Build a basic neural network and train it for a computer vision application. The training consists of tips and techniques along with assessments. The flexible deadline allows you to learn as per your convenience.Duration: 4 weeks, 4 to 5 hours per weekRating: 4.6 out of 5You can Sign up HereReview :without a doubt, Laurences teaching is much better than reading the documentation! The course is a great starting point!If you want to jumpstart a career in AI then this specialization will help you achieve that. Through this array of 5 courses, you will explore the foundational topics of Deep Learning, understand how to build neural networks, and lead successful ML projects. Along with this, there are opportunities to work on case studies from various real-world industries. The practical assignments will allow you to practice the concepts in Python and in Tensorflow. Additionally, there are talks from top leaders in the field that will give you motivation and help you to understand the scenarios in this line of work.Key USPs- Learn about convolutional networks, RNNs, BatchNorm, Dropout and more. The lessons will help you to learn different techniques using which you can build models to solve real-life problems. Real-world case studies in fields such as healthcare, autonomous driving, sign language reading, music generation, and natural language processing are covered. Gain best practices and advice from the industry experts and leaders. Complete all the assessments and assignments as per your schedule to earn the specialization completion certification.Duration: 3 months, 10 hours per weekRating: 4.9 out of 5You can Sign up HereGoogles Tensorflow is indeed one of the top framework used in the field of artificial intelligence to arrive at solutions.This course is specifically designed to help you use this framework to create artificial neural networks for deep learning. The lessons cover all the topics in details which guides you understand them thoroughly. There is a perfect balance between theory and practical implementation. Some of the important concepts covered include neural network basics, densely networks, autoencoders, reinforcement learning.Key USPs  Understand how neural network works and conduct reinforcement learning with OpenAI Gym. Use Tensorflow for classification, regression tasks, and time series analysis. Create generative adversarial networks and solve unsupervised learning problems with autoencoders. The certification can be taken by anyone with basic knowledge of programming and mathematics. 96 Lectures + 7 Articles + 5 Downloadable resources +Full Lifetime Access Clear instructions regarding the installations and necessary configurations.Duration: 14 hoursRating: 4.4 out of 5You can Sign up HereReview : Jose provides excellent explanations for the concepts and the run through with the code and exercises are straight to the point (with optional resources to learn more which I would recommend from time to time depending on how green you are with certain concepts/coding practice). Given the right background, attentiveness and patience to attempt the exercises before the solution videos; you will learn a lot about deep learning and tensorflow. -Adrian OLearyThis specialization in Machine Learning created by Google Cloud provides an opportunity to learn one of the most sought-after skills in todays world. The program promises to take you on an overview of the importance of Machine Learning to lectures about building ML models. It starts with introductory level lessons that cover what machine learning is capable of and why is it so popular followed by classes that focus on Tensorflow, an open source machine learning framework. These set of lectures aim to help you to create, train, deploy ML models, solve numerical problems and much more. There are also numerous hands-on opportunities to enhance the accuracy of ML using the various features available on the Google Cloud Platform.Key USPs  Great program to get started for a machine learning data scientist or similar profile. Well structured curriculum with a detailed focus on each section. Lots of hands-on opportunities to understand how the various concepts of machine learning actually work. The specialization is composed of 5 courses. It is recommended to follow the order of the programs as specified.Duration: 1 month, 14 hours per weekRating: 4.5 out of 5You can Sign up HereThis e-learning platform brings you a series of certifications and training that will help you to enhance your skills in working with Tensorflow irrespective of your current expertise level. The programs are divided into three difficulty levels namely beginner, intermediate, and advanced. Build classification models, perform sentiment analysis, debug and monitor programs among others. By the end of your chosen class, you will have the confidence to take on projects and more complex courses.Key USPs  The novice level lectures cover all the topics from scratch with detailed guidance regarding the setup of the software. There are practical assignments and quizzes that will help you measure your grasp on the knowledge acquired. Set your schedules as per your convenience.-The videos and study materials are available free of cost for the first ten days after enrollment.Duration: Self-pacedRating: 4.6 out of 5You can Sign up HereIf you have a basic understanding of machine learning, python, and deep learning concepts and want to put it to use to enhance your skills then this is the program for you. In this lessons, you will cover the basic concepts, main functions, operations and execution pipeline. Apply the features for backpropagation to time the weights and biases while the neural networks are being trained. End the program by exploring the different types of deep architectures.Key USPs- Use the framework for curve fitting, regression, classification, and minimization of the error function. Different deep architectures include recurrent networks, autoencoder, and convolutional networks. Well structured course with a detailed explanation for every concept.-The interactive nature of the tutorials makes it a popular choice among students.-All the study materials and videos are available for free; certification can be availed for an additional fee.Duration: 5 weeks, 2 to 4 hours per weekRating: 4.6 out of 5You can Sign up HereIf you want to work on Tensorflow using Javascript or build deep learning applications then you can check out these series of training. With concise lectures and practical exercises based on real-world scenarios, you will be able to learn by doing. Build apps, avoid common mistakes, optimize and scale them by following the guidance of the instructors.Key USPs- Knowledge of basic JavaScript/Python is required to get the maximum benefit. Thorough instructions are given on how to handle the exercises and set up to follow along with the classes. The exercises are available for both online and offline use.-The relaxed and interactive teaching style of the instructor creates a great learning environment. Attempt the chapter quizzes after the completion of every chapter. The classes and materials can be accessed for free for the first thirty days after enrolment.Duration: Self-pacedRating: 4.5 out of 5You can Sign up HereIn this program created by Udacity and the Tensorflow Team, you will learn to build deep learning applications with TensorFlow. So if you are more of a hands-on learner then this is the course for you. Gain hands-on experience in building your own state of the art image classifier and more. Use the models in the real world on mobile devices, in the cloud, and browsers. End the classes by working on advanced techniques and algorithms with large datasets.Key USPs- Create your own AI applications with the knowledge gained throughout the lessons. Taught by industry pros you get access to rich earning content and interactive quizzes. Get continuous doubt clarification by interacting with the instructor. The self-paced learning makes the experience convenient and flexible. Complete course content is available for free.Duration: 2 monthsRating: 4.6 out of 5You can Sign up HereSo these were the 8 Best Tensorflow Tutorial, Class, Course, Training & Certification available online for 2019. Hope you found what you were looking for. Wish you a Happy Learning! 